.\" Copyright (c) Pablo Ventura. License: MIT.
.TH NATL 1 "2025-03-12" "0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
natl \- translate natural language to a Linux shell command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B natl
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIquery\fR...]
.PP
.B natl
.RB [ \-\-build\-man\-index ]
.RB [ \-\-man\-max\-pages \fIN\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B natl
converts natural language instructions into a single Linux shell command using a
local LLM (Ollama). The command is printed to stdout; it is not executed.
With shell integration (Ctrl+G), the command is inserted into your prompt so you
can edit it or press Enter to run it.
.PP
When invoked with no arguments, \fBnatl\fR opens an interactive configuration
menu. Settings are saved to \fI~/.config/natl/config.json\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model \fI MODEL \fR
Ollama model to use (overrides config).
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-explain
Ask the LLM for a brief explanation (for debugging).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print to stderr: model, Ollama URL, RAG usage, full prompt, raw response, and
final command.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-build\-man\-index
Build the embedding index from man section 1 (user commands) for RAG, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-man\-max\-pages \fI N \fR
When building the index, index at most \fIN\fR man pages (0 = no limit). Default
comes from config (\fIman_max_pages\fR, default 500).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Running \fBnatl\fR with no arguments opens the configuration menu:
.IP 1)
Ollama model (e.g. \fBllama3.2\fR, \fBphi3\fR).
.IP 2)
Ollama URL (default \fBhttp://localhost:11434\fR).
.IP 3)
Extra prompt instructions (text appended to the prompt).
.IP 4)
Explanation by default (toggle).
.IP 5)
List available models from Ollama.
.IP 6)
View full config JSON.
.IP 7)
Restore defaults.
.IP 8)
Use RAG (man pages): inject relevant man page snippets into the prompt.
.IP 9)
Embedding model for RAG (e.g. \fBnomic-embed-text\fR).
.IP 10)
Max pages to index when building the man index (default 500; 0 = all).
.IP 11)
Build man page index (run once after enabling RAG).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NATL_BIN
Path to the \fBnatl\fR script (used by shell integrations).
.TP
.B NATL_MODEL
Ollama model (overrides config).
.TP
.B OLLAMA_URL
Ollama API base URL (overrides config).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/natl/config.json
Configuration (model, URL, RAG settings, etc.).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/natl/man_index.json
RAG index built from man pages (when RAG is enabled).
.SH USAGE
With shell integration (see \fIinstall.sh\fR), type a natural language request
in the prompt and press \fBCtrl+G\fR to replace the line with the generated
command. You can prefix the line with \fBnatl \fR or omit it.
.PP
As a standalone command, \fBnatl\fR prints the generated command to stdout:
.RS
.PP
\fBnatl find all pdf files\fR
.br
\fBfind . \-name "*.pdf"\fR
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ollama (1),
.BR man (1)
.PP
Full documentation: \fI/usr/share/doc/natl/README.md\fR (when installed from
the \.deb package), or see the project README.
